---
layout: post
title: "2016 Haiku"
category: poetry
tags: [haiku]
---

Haiku is a form of poetry that appeals to me in significant and growing ways: they are the right size for an impatient poet; they have strict formal requirements* within which the writer has complete freedom of subject and word-choice; they align with my current professional goal of saying meaningful things very efficiently and in a very small space. *While haiku don't have to follow any rules to be good, and there's no consensus on how to translate ancient rules of haiku into English, I decided to follow a strict, traditional, western syllable limit for the poems, that is 5-7-5.*

These are the best of a recent prolific period. After writing a few poems a year for years, I recently picked up a paper notebook, and wrote 30 haiku in about 20 days. 

.  
.  
.
### Haiku Divina
.  
.  
.  
*Seven poems making the poetry of scripture my own, an exercise in lectio divina--four from Isaiah 1; one each from Romans 9, Song 8, Matthew 11*

<hr width="30%" />

Solemnity is \
The costume iniquity \
Is wearing to church.

<hr width="30%" />

Spread your hands in prayer --  \
I hide my eyes from you -- there: \
blood has stained your palm.

<hr width="30%" />

You will be like wool, \
if you agree and obey; \
grass-fed and content.

<hr width="30%" />

Embarrassed at these \
gardens that you have chosen -- \
you're tinder, and spark.

<hr width="30%" />

it's not who wants it \
most, or who runs it down, just \
God, who has mercy

<hr width="30%" />

Love, as strong as death; \
Jealousy, like the grave. \
Flash! The flame of God.

<hr width="30%" />

Light load, easy yoke \
is co-creation, never \
build a house alone.

<hr width="30%" />
.  
.  
.  
### Recursive Haiku
.  
.  
.  
*Two poems referencing the form in the function*

<hr width="30%" />

Ecclesiastes \
wrote a hundred haiku, then \
drew one conclusion.

<hr width="30%" />

Haiku for every \
star and grain of sand, falling \
between a child's hands

<hr width="30%" />
.  
.  
.
### Miscellaneous
.  
.  
.
<hr width="30%" />

the end of simpler \
times: see the learned man pass \
through the garden gate 

<hr width="30%" />

To be powerless, \
Led by the hand -- bad enough! \
Yet, reckoned a child? 

