---
layout: post
title: "Tree Huggers Avoid Pine"
category : essay
tagline:
tags : []
---
{% include JB/setup %}


I have not always loved pine trees, and I'm not sure I like them very much right now. But I've learned to love them in a way that is different than the liking that I have for things like rose bushes.

I think pine trees are not very pretty. Their leaves are spiky, their branches craggy and rough, and they produce a thin, pale shade. The pine tree has none of the comforting qualities that leafier trees have. There is no softness to them: their leaves don't flutter in a breeze, and their bark would make even a die-hard tree-hugger think twice. 

While some trees dispense breakfast syrup for the love of the children, pine trees ooze a hell-spawned fluid that combines the best qualities of Crazy Glue and the what comes out of a sick toddler's nose. The closest thing to a flower on the pine is a *cone*, and they have a waxy pale green appearance while still in the tree, and a dangerous, spiky aggressiveness when coming out of one.


Recently however, I was out walking a trail on a windy, gray day, and I passed under pine trees as I walked. There were drops on the wind, but there was much more blow than there was pour. I heard the wind that day. I heard it, because it makes a certain noise as it blows through a pine tree. It isn't a soft sound. As I looked up into the pine trees, I experienced the tree in a new way. Of course pine trees don't have soft, fluttery leaves in the shape of fans that flutter in the wind. Pine trees generally live in places where soft, fluttery trees would be stripped of their leaves in an afternoon and sent away naked. Of course their leaves are needles! Nothing else would survive the pacific coast, where the Monterey Pines root themselves in ancient sandstone and lean into the wind, while their branches bend behind them, like a winged angel on the hood of an old car speeding toward the horizon. No other tree would survive at the very top of the tree-line, where alpine conditions favor hard grasses, and lichen. In these inhospitable places White Pines twist and warp in the wind, while their roots hold cracked granite in a death grip: a Bristlecone Pine in California is the oldest single living tree on Planet Earth. There are older tree systems, trees that die after a measly 500 years or so, but whose roots are able to produce another tree--theses are shown to live close to 10,000 years. But California's Bristlecone--root, trunk, and branch--has weathered 5000 winters without the benefit of regeneration or rebirth. 

And so I love the pine tree not for how it looks or what kind of shade it provides, but for the storms it weathers. I like it for how it survives.

krummholz
